ros2 bag record/play service tutorial. (#4322)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data.rst

>     ---

Reviewer: (due to GitHub UI limitations, I can't put this comment where it belongs)

Up above on line 91, it says:

```
`ros2 bag` can only record data from published messages in topics.
```

I think that statement is a little confusing now that we are also adding in services.  Maybe reword that to something like:

```
`ros2 bag` can record data from messages published to topics.
```

Author: Nice catch, fixed with https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

    ros2 topic hz /turtle1/pose

Managing Service Data
---------------------

1 Setup
^^^^^^^

You'll be recording service data between ``introspection_client`` and ``introspection_service``, then display and replay that same data later on.
To record service data between service client and server, ``Service Introspection`` must be enabled on the node.

Let's start ``introspection_client`` and ``introspection_service`` nodes and enable ``Service Introspection``.
You can see more details for :doc:`Service Introspection Demo <../../Demos/Service-Introspection>`.

Open a new terminal and run ``introspection_service``, enabling ``Service Introspection``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_service --ros-args -p service_configure_introspection:=contents

Open another terminal and run ``introspection_client``, enabling ``Service Introspection``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_client --ros-args -p client_configure_introspection:=contents

2 Check a service availability

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2 Check service availability
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

``ros2 bag`` can only record data from available services.
To see the list of your system's services, open a new terminal and run the command:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 service list

Which will return:

.. code-block:: console

  /add_two_ints
  /introspection_client/describe_parameters
  /introspection_client/get_parameter_types
  /introspection_client/get_parameters
  /introspection_client/get_type_description
  /introspection_client/list_parameters
  /introspection_client/set_parameters
  /introspection_client/set_parameters_atomically
  /introspection_service/describe_parameters
  /introspection_service/get_parameter_types
  /introspection_service/get_parameters
  /introspection_service/get_type_description
  /introspection_service/list_parameters
  /introspection_service/set_parameters
  /introspection_service/set_parameters_atomically

> To check if ``Service Introspection`` is enable on client and service, run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if ``Service Introspection`` is enabled on the client and service, run the command:
```

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 service echo --flow-style /add_two_ints

> You will be seeing service communication below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see service communication like below:
```

.. code-block:: console

  info:
    event_type: REQUEST_SENT
    stamp:
      sec: 1713995389
      nanosec: 386809259
    client_gid: [1, 15, 96, 219, 162, 1, 108, 201, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 21, 3]
    sequence_number: 133
  request: [{a: 2, b: 3}]
  response: []
  ---

3 Record services
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To record the service data, the following options are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To record service data, the following options are supported.
```

5 Play service data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before replaying the bag file, enter ``Ctrl+C`` in the terminal where ``introspection_client`` is running.
When ``introspection_client`` stops running, ``introspection_service`` also stops printing the result because there are no incoming requests.

Replaying the service data from the bag file will start sending the requests to ``introspection_service``.

Enter the command:

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 bag play --publish-service-requests <bag_file_name>

The terminal will return the message:

.. code-block:: console

  [INFO] [1713997477.870856190] [rosbag2_player]: Set rate to 1
  [INFO] [1713997477.877417477] [rosbag2_player]: Adding keyboard callbacks.
  [INFO] [1713997477.877442404] [rosbag2_player]: Press SPACE for Pause/Resume
  [INFO] [1713997477.877447855] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_RIGHT for Play Next Message
  [INFO] [1713997477.877452655] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_UP for Increase Rate 10%
  [INFO] [1713997477.877456954] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_DOWN for Decrease Rate 10%
  [INFO] [1713997477.877573647] [rosbag2_player]: Playback until timestamp: -1

> Your ``introspection_service`` terminal will once start printing the following service messages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your ``introspection_service`` terminal will once again start printing the following service messages:
```

.. code-block:: console

  [INFO] [1713997478.090466075] [introspection_service]: Incoming request
  a: 2 b: 3

> This is because ``ros2 bag play`` sends the service request data from bag file to ``/add_two_ints`` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because ``ros2 bag play`` sends the service request data from the bag file to the ``/add_two_ints`` service.
```

    ros2 topic hz /turtle1/pose

Managing Service Data
---------------------

1 Setup
^^^^^^^

> You'll be recording service data between ``introspection_client`` and ``introspection_service``, then display and replay later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll be recording service data between ``introspection_client`` and ``introspection_service``, then display and replay that same data later on.
```

Author: fixed by https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

To record service data between service client and server, ``Service Introspection`` must be enabled on the node.

Let's start ``introspection_client`` and ``introspection_service`` nodes and enable ``Service Introspection``.
You can see more details for :doc:`Service Introspection Demo <../../Demos/Service-Introspection>`.

Open a new terminal and run ``introspection_service``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_service

Open another terminal and run ``introspection_client``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_client

> Let's also enable ``Service Introspection`` on both nodes:

Reviewer 2: Should we inform readers that enabling service introspection for either the service or client side is also possible? 

When service introspection is enabled on the service side, rosbag2 will record events when requests are received and responses are sent. Likewise, when enabled on the client side, rosbag2 will log when requests are sent and responses are received.

Author: for `service introspection`, we already have a tutorial with https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/blob/rolling/source/Tutorials/Demos/Service-Introspection.rst.

that is why, i add the reference to it. so we can expect user already knows about `Service Introspection`.

Reviewer 2: Okay.

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 param set /introspection_service service_configure_introspection contents

and

.. code-block:: console

>   ros2 param set /introspection_client client_configure_introspection contents

Reviewer: I think we can simplify this entire bit by just passing the parameters on the initial run command.  Like this:

```suggestion
Open a new terminal and run ``introspection_service``, enabling ``Service Introspection``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_service --ros-args -p service_configure_introspection:=contents

Open another terminal and run ``introspection_client``, enabling ``Service Introspection``:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp introspection_client --ros-args -p client_configure_introspection:=contents
```

Author: fixed by https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

  [INFO] [1713995957.666048323] [rosbag2_recorder]: Subscribed to topic '/add_two_ints/_service_event'
  [INFO] [1713995957.666092458] [rosbag2_recorder]: Recording...

Now ``ros2 bag`` is recording the service data published on the ``/add_two_ints`` service.
To stop the recording, enter ``Ctrl+C`` in the terminal.

The data will be accumulated in a new bag directory with a name in the pattern of ``rosbag2_year_month_day-hour_minute_second``.
This directory will contain a ``metadata.yaml`` along with the bag file in the recorded format.

4 Inspect service data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can see details about your recording by running:

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 bag info <bag_file_name>

Running this command will return a list of information on the file:

.. code-block:: console

  Files:             rosbag2_2024_04_24-14_59_17_0.mcap
  Bag size:          15.1 KiB
  Storage id:        mcap
  ROS Distro:        rolling
  Duration:          9.211s
  Start:             Apr 24 2024 14:59:17.676 (1713995957.676)
  End:               Apr 24 2024 14:59:26.888 (1713995966.888)
  Messages:          0
  Topic information:
  Service:           1

>   Service information: Service: /add_two_ints | Type: example_interfaces/srv/AddTwoInts | Event Count: 78 | Serialization Format: cd  r

Reviewer 2: `cd r` -> `cdr`

Author: good eye! fixed.

5 Play service data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we adjust the content to describe two different use scenarios ?

1. If you want to see the recorded information of service requests/responses.
    
      ros2 bag play  <bag_file_name>
      
      You can check request/response information by command `ros2 service echo --flow-style <service_name>`
      
2. If you want to send recorded service requests.

     ros2 bag play --publish-service-requests <bag_file_name>

Author: > If you want to see the recorded information of service requests/responses.

originally i wanted to keep this tutorial as simple as possible. but i think that is fine to add it.

Author: @Barry-Xu-2018 

one question,

> If you want to see the recorded information of service requests/responses.
> ros2 bag play <bag_file_name>
> You can check request/response information by command ros2 service echo --flow-style <service_name>

precisely we need to do `ros2 topic echo <service_name>/_service_event`, and do we really want to introduce the hidden topic for beginner tutorial?
i am not inclined to introduce that information here though...

if we want to add more details something like this, i think we can add more information for https://github.com/ros2/rosbag2/blob/rolling/docs/design/rosbag2_record_replay_service.md

Reviewer 2: > precisely we need to do ros2 topic echo <service_name>/_service_event, and do we really want to introduce the hidden topic for beginner tutorial?
i am not inclined to introduce that information here though...

Yes. User may don't know the detail of service introspection.  
So I want user to use `ros2 service echo --flow-style <service_name> <service_type>` (). Users do not need to know about the hidden topic.

Replaying the service data from the bag file will start sending the requests to ``introspection_service``.

Enter the command:

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 bag play --publish-service-requests <bag_file_name>

The terminal will return the message:

.. code-block:: console

  [INFO] [1713997477.870856190] [rosbag2_player]: Set rate to 1
  [INFO] [1713997477.877417477] [rosbag2_player]: Adding keyboard callbacks.
  [INFO] [1713997477.877442404] [rosbag2_player]: Press SPACE for Pause/Resume
  [INFO] [1713997477.877447855] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_RIGHT for Play Next Message
  [INFO] [1713997477.877452655] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_UP for Increase Rate 10%
  [INFO] [1713997477.877456954] [rosbag2_player]: Press CURSOR_DOWN for Decrease Rate 10%
  [INFO] [1713997477.877573647] [rosbag2_player]: Playback until timestamp: -1

Your ``introspection_service`` terminal will once start printing the following service messages:

.. code-block:: console

  [INFO] [1713997478.090466075] [introspection_service]: Incoming request
  a: 2 b: 3

This is because ``ros2 bag play`` sends the service request data from bag file to ``/add_two_ints`` service.

> We can also introspect service communication even with ``ros2 bag play`` to verify the ``introspection_service``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also introspect service communication as ``ros2 bag play`` is playing it back to verify the ``introspection_service``.
```

Author: fixed by https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

> Run the command before ``ros2 bag play`` to see the ``introspection_service``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run this command before ``ros2 bag play`` to see the ``introspection_service``:
```

Author: fixed by https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

.. code-block:: console

  ros2 service echo --flow-style /add_two_ints

> You can see the service request from bag file and service response from  ``introspection_service``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the service request from the bag file and the service response from  ``introspection_service``.
```

Author: fixed by https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/pull/4322/commits/097adcf962556145a8fc920cf7fc6fc2d71f045e

.. code-block:: console

  info:

>     event_type: REQUEST_RECEIVED

Reviewer 3: @fujitatomoya, I am a bit confused about this part. 
As far as I understood correctly,  this paragraph is supposed to describe the ability to introspect recorded services communication even without running a real `/add_two_ints` service from the `introspection_service` node in a loop during playback.
If this is the case, we need to mention about it explicitly and ask the user to shutdown the `introspection_service` node before playback.  
If I misunderstood the purpose of this paragraph, could you please clarify it to me?

Reviewer 2: @MichaelOrlov 

I understand that the content above describes  

When using rosbag2 to play requests (The user already running a service with service introspection enabled), how users can view the information of requests/responses at that time.

Author: yes, that is my intention.

of course, there are some other ways to see the service data stored in data base.

- using database backend cli e.g `mcap` cli to see the bag file. (vendor specific)
- we can do `ros2 topic echo /add_two_ints/_service_events` with playing the bag data.

since this is tutorial, i was thinking that most common case that how to use the service bag file.
so i keep the service running, and sending the request from the bag file for replay the data.
for checking the service server's behavior, we use `ros2 service echo` here.

IMO, this is the most useful tutorial for users to use rosbag2 service feature.
